# Modified-Double-U-Net-Architecture-for-Medical-Image-Segmentation
## This repository contains code for the paper entitled "Modified Double U-Net Architecture for Medical Image Segmentation" published at IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences and the same can be obtained from [here](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9946418).

# Abstract 

Semantic segmentation is the process of labelling each pixel of an input image with its appropriate class. In biomedical image processing, semantic segmentation is a critical pre-processing step. After the evolution of deep learning, specifically, the U-Net, which is based on the encoder-decoder model, researchers have extensively used several modified versions of U-Net for semantic segmentation. This manuscript presents a novel architecture called modified Double U-Net for various biomedical image segmentation tasks. The modified Double U-Net takes full advantage of Double U-Net and ensemble learning. It is the combination of two U-Net architectures stacked on top of each other. The first U-Net uses an ensemble of pre-trained Xception, DenseNet, and VGG-19. We have deliberately used a pre-trained model so that the features learnt from the ImageNet classification task can be reused for our semantic segmentation task. Another U-Net is stacked at the bottom to capture more information that can be used in our semantic segmentation task.
The performance of our proposed model has been evaluated on five different medical datasets, namely the Data Science Bowl Challenge-2018, the CVC-ClinicDB dataset, which has complex images such as smaller and flat polyps, the ISIC-2018 challenge dataset, the Kvasir-Instrument dataset, and the INBreast dataset achieving state-of-the-art performance. Conducting five-fold cross-validation on the five datasets mentioned above IoU of 89.13 ± 2.88, 85.22 ± 1.26, 83.13 ± 3.56, 85.22 ± 1.26, and 95.22 ± 2.56 were obtained.

# Model description 

As the name suggests, the modified double U-Net consists of two U-Nets stacked over each other. As shown in figure below, the modified Double U-Net begins with network1 or the first U-Net, which is built with an ensemble of VGG-19, Xception Net, and DenseNet121. The ensemble of three different pre-trained networks act as an encoder1. The output1 is collected from the end of the network1 and is multiplied with the original input before passing it to the second network or the second U-Net. It is expected that the output created at the end of the network1 may be enhanced further by retrieving the input image and its related mask once again and concatenating it with Output2. It will result in a better segmentation mask than the previous one.The squeeze-and-excite block is used in network 1's encoder and network 2's encoder and decoder to eliminate unnecessary information and pass only the important ones and ASPP (Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling) has been a popular choice for modern segmentation architecture because it helps to extract high-resolution feature maps that lead to superior performance.
